The Translation



The Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra 

The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines



Chapter 1: Introduction



We prostrate to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas.



Thus did I hear at one time. The Lord dwelt at Rājagṛha on Gṛdhrakūṭa Hill together with a great community of monks, numbering five thousand monks, all worthy ones with the exception of one single person‍—that is, venerable Ānanda‍—with outflows dried up, without afflictions, fully controlled, with their minds well freed and their wisdom well freed, thoroughbreds, great bull elephants, with their work done, their task accomplished, with their burden laid down, with their own goal accomplished, with the fetters that bound them to existence broken, with their hearts well freed by perfect understanding, in perfect control of their whole mind; with nuns numbering five hundred‍—Yaśodharā, Mahāprajāpatī, and so on‍—and with a great many laymen and laywomen, all of them with a vision of the Dharma; and with an unbounded, infinite number of bodhisattva great beings, all of whom had acquired the dhāraṇīs, were dwellers in emptiness, their range the signless, and who had not fashioned any wishes, had acquired forbearance for the sameness of all dharmas, had acquired the dhāraṇī of nonattachment, with imperishable clairvoyant knowledges, and with speech worth listening to; who were not hypocrites, not fawners, without thoughts of reputation and gain; who were Dharma teachers without thought of compensation, with perfect forbearance for the deep dharmas, who had obtained the fearlessnesses, and who had transcended all the works of Māra, who had cut the continuum of karmic obscuration, were skillful in expounding the analysis of investigations into phenomena, with the prayer that is a vow made during an asaṃkhyeya of eons really fully carried out, with smiling countenances, forward in addressing others, without a frown on their faces, skillful in communicating with others in chanted verse, without feelings of depression, without losing the confidence giving a readiness to speak, and endowed with fearlessness when surpassing endless assemblies; who were skilled in going forth during an ananta of one hundred million eons, understanding phenomena to be like an illusion, a mirage, a reflection of the moon in water, a dream, an echo, an apparition, a reflection in the mirror, and a magical creation; who were skillful in comprehending the thoughts, conduct, and beliefs of all beings and subtle knowledge, with unobstructed thoughts, and endowed with extreme patience; who were skilled in causing entry into reality just as it is, having appropriated all the endless arrays of the buddhafields through prayer and setting out, with the meditative stabilization recollecting buddhas in an infinite number of world systems constantly and always activated; who were skillful in soliciting innumerable buddhas; who were skillful in eliminating the various views, propensities, obsessions, and defilements; and who were skillful in accomplishing a hundred thousand feats through meditative concentration. That is, he was together with the bodhisattva great beings Bhadrapāla, Ratnākara, Ratnagarbha, Ratnadatta, Susārthavaha, Varuṇadeva, Guhyagupta, Indradatta, Uttaramatin, Viśeṣamatin, Vardhamāna­matin, Anantamati, Amoghadarśin, Anāvaraṇamatin, Susaṃprasthita, Su­vikrānta­vikrāmin, Anantavīrya, Nityodyukta, Nityaprayukta, Anikṣiptadhura, Sūryagarbha, Anupamamatin, and Avalokiteśvara, Mahā­sthāma­prāpta, Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta, Māra­bala­pramardin, Vajramatin, Ratna­mudrā­hasta, Nityotkṣipta­hasta, Mahā­karuṇā­cinta, Mahāvyūha, Vyūharāja, and Merukūṭa, the bodhisattva great being Maitreya, and many hundreds of thousands of one hundred million billion other bodhisattvas as well.



Thereupon the Lord, having himself arranged the lion throne, sat down with his legs crossed, holding his body erect, intent on fixing mindfulness, and entered into the meditative stabilization, samādhirāja by name, in which all meditative stabilizations are put, included, encompassed, and come to meet.



Then the Lord, mindful and self-possessed, emerged from this meditative stabilization and surveyed with his divine eye all world systems. Having done so, he beamed with his whole body. From the wheels with a thousand spokes on the soles of his feet issued sixty sixty-one hundred thousand one hundred million billion rays, from the ten toes of his feet issued sixty sixty-one hundred thousand one hundred million billion rays, and similarly from his ankles, legs, knees, thighs, hips, and navel, from his two sides, and from the śrīvatsa mark of a great person in his heart issued sixty sixty-one hundred thousand one hundred million billion rays. From his ten fingers issued sixty sixty-one hundred thousand one hundred million billion rays. Similarly, from his two forearms, two shoulders, neck, four eyeteeth, all forty teeth, two nostrils, ears, and eyes, ūrṇā, the uṣṇīṣa on the top of his head, and from the opening of his mouth issued sixty sixty-one hundred thousand one hundred million billion rays. All these sixty sixty-one hundred thousand one hundred million billion rays pervaded the world systems in their entirety with a great illumination and lit them up. This great illumination from the light rays spread out through as many world systems in the eastern direction as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River. Similarly, this great illumination from the light rays spread out through each of as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions to the northeast, southeast, southwest, northwest, below and above, and lit them up. And all the beings who saw that light, who were touched by the illumination of those light rays, became irreversible from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.



Thereupon all the Lord’s hair pores became radiant. From each of the hair pores sixty sixty-one hundred thousand one hundred million billion rays issued forth, and these rays pervaded all the world systems in the great billionfold world system with a great illumination. This great illumination from the light rays spread out through as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east, pervading them with a great illumination and lighting them up. Similarly, this illumination from the light rays spread out through each of as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions to the northeast, southeast, southwest, and northwest, below and above, and lit them up. And all the beings who saw that light, who were touched by the illumination of those light rays, became irreversible from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.



Then the Lord, with the light from the natural splendor of a tathāgata, pervaded the great billionfold world system with a great illumination. He pervaded as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east with this great illumination, and he similarly pervaded each of as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions to the northeast, southeast, southwest, and northwest, below and above, with this great illumination. And all the beings who saw that light, who were touched by the illumination of those light rays, became irreversible from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.



Thereupon the Lord extended his tongue and with it covered the great billionfold world system in its entirety. Having pervaded the great billionfold world system with his tongue, he smiled, and from his tongue again many hundred thousand one hundred million billion variously colored rays issued forth, and on all the light rays stood lotuses made of manifold precious stones, shining like gold, each with a thousand petals, variegated, beautiful, captivating, brilliant, fragrant, and soft, all completely like the kācalindika, pleasing to the touch. On the lotuses, furthermore, were seated many embodied tathāgatas, teaching Dharma‍—this very teaching of Dharma associated with the six perfections. They went to as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east and taught Dharma‍—this very teaching of Dharma associated with the perfection of wisdom‍—and similarly, to each of as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions to the northeast, southeast, southwest, and northwest, below and above, and taught Dharma‍—this very teaching of Dharma associated with the six perfections. And all the beings who listened to that Dharma became irreversible from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening.



Then the Lord, seated on that very lion throne, entered into the meditative stabilization called siṃhavikrīḍita. He enacted such a performance with his miraculous power that his performance of miraculous power shook the great billionfold world system in six ways: it shook, shook greatly, and shook violently; it quaked, quaked greatly, and quaked violently; it stirred, stirred greatly, and stirred violently; it became disturbed, greatly disturbed, and violently disturbed; it roared, roared greatly, and roared violently; and it resounded, resounded greatly, and resounded violently. At the edges it rose up and it sank down in the middle; in the middle it rose up and at the edges sank down. It became soft and oily, producing benefit and ease for all beings. Thereupon, at that moment, minute, and second, in the great billionfold world system the continuums of the hells and the animal world, and the world of Yama, were all cut. And all the places that preclude a perfect human birth disappeared. All those beings were reborn among humans, and also among the Cāturmahā­rājika, Trāyastriṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇarati, and Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin gods.



Thereupon, in their great joy and rejoicing these humans and gods recalled their former lives, and having recalled them approached the Lord, bowed to his feet with their heads, cupped their palms together in a gesture of prayerful supplication, and bowed forward. And so too in each of the ten directions, in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east, to the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions, and below and above, the continuums of the hells, animal worlds, and the worlds of Yama in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River were all cut too. And all the places precluding a perfect human birth disappeared. All those beings were reborn among humans and the gods. Thereupon these humans and gods recalled their former lives. In their great joy and rejoicing they then approached the buddhas in their respective buddhafields, bowed to their feet with their heads, and with palms together in a gesture of prayerful supplication bowed forward.



Then, in the great billionfold world system, the beings who were born blind saw forms with their eyes, the deaf heard sounds with their ears, the insane regained their senses, those with distracted thoughts became one-pointed in their thoughts, the naked found clothes, the poor found wealth, the hungry found food, the thirsty found drink, the sick were healed, the sense faculties of those with damaged sense faculties were repaired, and the physically exhausted became no longer exhausted. Those who had not given up unwholesome deeds of body, speech, and mind, and unwholesome livelihood, gave up their unwholesome habits. All beings considered every being in the same way as they considered their mother, father, brother, and sister, and as they considered their friends, kinsmen, and blood relatives. And they were endowed with the ten wholesome actions and became celibate, pure, free from the stain of immorality, and free from all unwholesome conceptualization. And at that time all beings, possessed of all happiness, acquired the ease a monk feels when absorbed in the third concentration. And at that very time they were endowed with such knowledge that they knew, “Good is charity! Good is self-discipline! Good is restraint! Good it is to observe celibacy! Good is nonviolence toward living creatures!” And at that time the lord buddhas in other buddhafields cried out cries of delight: “Ah! It is amazing these beings are thus endowed with such knowledge that knows, ‘Good is charity! Good is self-discipline! Good is restraint! Good it is to observe celibacy! Good is nonviolence toward living creatures!’ ”



Thereupon the Lord, seated on this very lion throne, stood out towering over the great billionfold world system with Sumeru, the encircling mountain ranges, the abodes of the gods, Indra, Brahmā, Vaśavartin, Śuddhāvāsa, and the classes of gods and asuras, shining forth, gleaming, dazzling, and shedding light with his light, color, brilliance, and glory in the same way as, for example, a strong sun or the disk of a full moon in a clear sky.



So too the Lord stood out towering over as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east with his light, color, brilliance, and glory. Similarly the Lord stood out towering over as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions, and below and above‍—in each of the ten directions‍—shining forth, gleaming, dazzling, and shedding light with his light, color, brilliance, and glory in the same way as, for example, Sumeru, the king of mountains, stands out towering over all mountains, shining forth, gleaming, dazzling, and shedding light; or in the same way as, for example, the disk of the moon towers over all the stars, shining forth, gleaming, dazzling, and shedding light; or in the same way as, for example, the disk of the sun stands out towering over all other lights, shining forth, gleaming, dazzling, and shedding light. So too the Lord stands out towering over world systems in the ten directions with their gods, Indras, Brahmās, Śuddhāvāsas, and the classes of gods and humans, shining forth, gleaming, dazzling, and shedding light with his light, color, brilliance, and glory.



Thereupon the Lord exhibited an ordinary bodily form, like that of beings in the great billionfold world system. Then in the great billionfold world system all the gods, from the gods of the Śuddhāvāsa class down to the Brahmakāyika, Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin, Nirmāṇarati, Tuṣita, Yāma, Trāyastriṃśa, and Cāturmahā­rājika gods saw the body of the Tathāgata you can never see enough. Feeling contented, pleased, delighted, joyful, and joyous, with such mental happiness they took celestial flowers, celestial garlands, celestial incense, celestial creams, celestial powders, and celestial perfumes; celestial blue lotuses, lotuses, red lotuses, white lotuses, nalina lilies and saugandhaka lilies; celestial flowers, nāgavṛkṣa flowers, and tamāla leaves; and celestial robes, celestial jewelry, celestial parasols, flags, and banners and approached the Lord. Those humans to be trained, in the form of recipients seated in the great billionfold world system, saw the body of the Tathāgata you can never see enough, took land and water flowers, and approached the body of the Tathāgata you can never see enough. Both gods and humans then strewed near, strewed in front, and strewed all around the body of the Tathāgata these celestial flowers, incense, perfumes, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, banners, and land and water flowers.



By the sustaining power of the Lord all this rain of flowers, incense, perfumes, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, banners, and land and water flowers that was strewed down on the Lord stayed there like a second story made of flowers and so on, with the dimensions of the great billionfold world system, in the sky right above the Lord’s head. And from this second story tassels made of celestial flowers and silk were suspended, hanging there, hanging right there, and these tassels made of celestial flowers and silk made the great billionfold world system look very beautiful. And the brightly shining golden color of the Lord streaming forth in the ten directions pervaded and lit up as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in each direction. This thought then occurred to each of the gods and humans in all the Jambudvīpa world systems in the great billionfold world system: “The Tathāgata is seated in front of us teaching the Dharma.” Similarly, this thought occurred to the gods in the Godānīyas to the west, Videhas to the east, and Kurus to the north, to the Cāturmahā­rājika gods up to the Akaniṣṭha gods, and similarly to all thegods and humans in a thousandfold [four-continent] world system, in a millionfold world system, or in a great billionfold world system: “The Tathāgata is seated in front of us teaching the Dharma.”



Thereupon the Lord, seated on this very lion throne, smiled once again. Through the illumination from that smile the great billionfold world system was lit up, and all the beings seated in the great billionfold world system saw the Lord Buddha, together with his śrāvaka saṅgha, in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east. And all those beings seated in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east saw the Lord Śākyamuni, together with his community of monks, in this Sahā world system.



Similarly, the beings included in this Sahā world system saw the Lord Buddha, together with his śrāvaka saṅgha, in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions to the northeast, southeast, southwest, and northwest, below and above. And all those beings seated in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River as well saw this Sahā world system and the Lord Śākyamuni, together with his community of monks.



In the east, beyond as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, at the very limit of these world systems, there is a world system called Ratnāvatī. In it the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Ratnākara now dwells and maintains himself. He teaches to the bodhisattvas this very perfection of wisdom. Then, in that world system a bodhisattva, a great being, called Samantaraśmi saw this great illumination, this great shaking of the earth, and the body of the Lord you can never see enough, and he approached the lord Ratnākara, the tathāgata, and inquired of the tathāgata Ratnākara, “What is the cause, O Lord, what is the reason for this great illumination having manifested in the world, and for this great shaking of the earth, and for the presence of the body of the Tathāgata you can never see enough?”



The lord Ratnākara replied to the bodhisattva Samantaraśmi, “There is, child of a good family, beyond as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the western direction, a world system called Sahā. There the tathāgata Śākyamuni now dwells and maintains himself, also teaching the Dharma to the bodhisattvas. This sort of thing is his power.”



Then the bodhisattva Samantaraśmi said to the tathāgata Ratnākara, “I will go to that Sahā world system to see, salute, and honor that tathāgata Śākyamuni, and to see those bodhisattva great beings, for the most part in the form of the young, who have acquired the dhāraṇīs and detailed and thorough knowledges and acquired mastery over all the meditative stabilizations and absorptions.”



The Lord replied, “Go then, child of a good family, since you feel that now is the right time.”



Thereupon the tathāgata Ratnākara gave the bodhisattva Samantaraśmi a thousand lotuses made of manifold jewels, each with a thousand petals shining like gold, saying, “Child of a good family, strew these lotuses over the tathāgata Śākyamuni. Be on your best behavior in that buddhafield. And why? Because the bodhisattvas born in that Sahā world system are difficult to approach.”



Thereupon the bodhisattva Samantaraśmi received from the tathāgata Ratnākara the lotuses made of manifold jewels, each with a thousand petals shining like gold. Surrounded by, and at the head of, many hundred thousand one hundred million billion bodhisattvas, householders and renunciates, young men and women, he disappeared together with them from that buddhafield and, having respected, revered, honored, and worshiped as many lords as there are dwelling and maintaining themselves in the east with flowers, incense, perfumes, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners, arrived there in the Sahā world through that bodhisattva’s great wonder-working and that bodhisattva’s great power. He approached the tathāgata Śākyamuni, went up to him, bowed to the Lord’s feet with his head, and stood to one side. The bodhisattva Samantaraśmi then addressed the Lord, the tathāgata Śākyamuni: “The lord Ratnākara inquires about the Lord’s health, hopes that the Lord is well and free from sickness, alert and buoyant, eating well, strong, and comfortable. The lord Ratnākara has also dispatched these lotuses for the Lord.”



The lord tathāgata Śākyamuni accepted the lotuses and threw them back to the lord buddhas in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east. Those lotuses spread throughout those world systems, and on them were seated buddha bodies. In those buddhafields they taught Dharma‍—this very teaching of Dharma associated with the six perfections. And the beings who heard that Dharma became certain to reach unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Thereupon those bodhisattvas, the householders and renunciates, young men and women, each one by virtue of his or her own wholesome roots, respected, revered, honored, and worshiped the lord Śākyamuni and sat down on one side.



Then in the south, beyond as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, at the very limit of these world systems, there is a world system called Sarva­śokāpagata. In it the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Aśokaśrī now dwells and maintains himself. Then, in that world system a bodhisattva, a great being, called Vigatāśoka and so on. Connect to the previous, at length, up to and sat down on one side.



Then in the west there is a world system called Upaśānta. In it the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Ratnārcis now dwells and maintains himself. Then, in that world system a bodhisattva, a great being, called Cāritramati and so on, at length, up to and sat down on one side.



Then in the north there is a world system called Jayā. In it the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Jayendra now dwells and maintains himself. Then, in that world system a bodhisattva, a great being, called Jayadatta and so on, at length, up to and sat down on one side.



Then in the intermediate northeast direction there is a world system called Samādhyalaṃkṛtā. In it the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Samādhi­hastyuttara­śrī now dwells and maintains himself. Then, in that world system a bodhisattva, a great being, called Vijayavikrāmin and so on, at length, up to and sat down on one side.



Then in the intermediate southeast direction there is a world system called Bodhi­maṇḍalālaṃkāra­su­rucitā. In it the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Padmottaraśrī now dwells and maintains himself. Then, in that world system a bodhisattva, a great being, called Padmahasta and so on, at length, up to and sat down on one side.



Then in the intermediate southwest direction there is a world system called Vigata­rajasaṃcayā. In it the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Sūrya­maṇḍala­prabhāsottara­śrī now dwells and maintains himself. Then, in that world system a bodhisattva, a great being, called Sūrya­pratibhāsa and so on, at length, up to and sat down on one side.



Then in the intermediate northwest direction there is a world system called Vaśībhūtā. In it the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Ekachattra now dwells and maintains himself. Then, in that world system a bodhisattva, a great being, called Ratnottama and so on, at length, up to and sat down on one side.



Then in the direction below there is a world system called Padmā. In it the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Padmaśrī now dwells and maintains himself. Then, in that world system a bodhisattva, a great being, called Padmottama and so on, at length, up to and sat down on one side.



Then in the direction above, beyond as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, at the very limit of these world systems, there is a world system called Nandā. In it the tathāgata, worthy one, perfectly complete buddha Nandaśrī now dwells and maintains himself. Then, in that world system a bodhisattva, a great being, called Nandadatta, saw this great illumination, this great shaking of the earth, and the body of the Lord you can never see enough, and he approached the lord Nandaśrī, the tathāgata, and inquired of the tathāgata Nandaśrī, “What is the cause, O Lord, what is the reason for this great illumination being manifested in the world, and for this great shaking of the earth, and for the presence of the body of the Tathāgata you can never see enough?”



The lord Nandaśrī replied to the bodhisattva Nandadatta, “There is, O child of a good family, beyond as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the direction below a world system called Sahā. There the tathāgata arhat, perfectly complete buddha Śākyamuni now dwells and maintains himself, also teaching the Dharma to the bodhisattvas. This sort of thing is his power.”



Then the bodhisattva Nandadatta said to the tathāgata Nandaśrī, “I will go to that Sahā world system to see, salute, and honor that tathāgata Śākyamuni, and to see those bodhisattva great beings, for the most part in the form of the young, who have acquired the dhāraṇīs and detailed and thorough knowledges and have acquired mastery over all the meditative stabilizations and absorptions.”



The Lord replied, “Go then, child of a good family, since you feel that now is the right time.”



Thereupon the tathāgata Nandaśrī gave the bodhisattva Nandadatta a thousand lotuses made of manifold jewels, each with a thousand petals shining like gold, saying, “These lotuses, child of a good family, strew over the tathāgata Śākyamuni. Be on your best behavior in that buddhafield. And why? Because the bodhisattvas born in that Sahā world system are difficult to approach.”



Thereupon the bodhisattva Nandadatta received from the tathāgata Nandaśrī the lotuses made of manifold jewels, each with a thousand petals shining like gold. Surrounded by and at the head of many hundred thousand one hundred million billion bodhisattvas, householders and renunciates, and young men and women, he disappeared together with them from that buddhafield, and, having respected, revered, honored, and worshiped as many lords as there are dwelling and maintaining themselves in the direction above with flowers, incense, perfumes, garlands, creams, powders, robes, parasols, flags, and banners, arrived there in the Sahā world through that bodhisattva’s great wonder-working and that bodhisattva’s great power. He approached the tathāgata Śākyamuni, went up to him, bowed to the Lord’s feet with his head, and stood to one side. The bodhisattva Nandadatta then addressed the lord, the tathāgata Śākyamuni: “The lord Nandaśrī inquires about the Lord’s health, hopes that the Lord is well and free from sickness, alert and buoyant, eating well, strong, and comfortable. The lord Nandaśrī has also dispatched these lotuses for the Lord.”



The lord tathāgata Śākyamuni accepted the lotuses and threw them back to the lords, the buddhas in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the direction above. Those lotuses spread throughout those world systems, and on them were seated buddha bodies. In those buddhafields they demonstrated Dharma‍—this very demonstration of Dharma associated with the perfection of wisdom. And the beings who heard that Dharma became irreversible from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening. Thereupon those bodhisattvas, the householders and renunciates, young men and women, each one by virtue of his or her own wholesome roots respected, revered, honored, and worshiped the lord Śākyamuni and sat down on one side.



Thereupon, at that moment, minute, and second, the great billionfold world system became constituted of jewels, filled with various blossoms, hung with clusters of silk streamers, made fragrant with incense pots, and beautified with wish-fulfilling trees whose stem-tips bend down with ornaments and fruit, and with flower trees, fruit trees, fragrance trees, flower-garland trees, and powder trees, just like Padmavatī, the buddhafield of the tathāgata Samantakusuma where Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta lives, as well as the god Susthitamati, and others who are magnificent bodhisattva great beings.



This was the first chapter, “Introduction,” of “The Perfection of Wisdom in Eighteen Thousand Lines.”



Chapter 2: Production of the Thought



When the Lord understood that the world with its celestial beings, Māras and Brahmās, śramaṇas and brahmins, gods and humans, as well as bodhisattvas, most of them in youthful form, had assembled, he said to venerable Śāriputra, “Here, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to all dharmas in all forms should make an effort at the perfection of wisdom.”



The Lord having spoken thus, venerable Śāriputra inquired of him, “How then, Lord, should bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to all dharmas in all forms make an effort at the perfection of wisdom?”



Venerable Śāriputra having thus inquired, the Lord said to him, “Śāriputra, here bodhisattva great beings, having stood in the perfection of wisdom by way of not taking their stand on it, should complete the perfection of giving by way of not giving up anything, because a gift, a giver, and a recipient are not apprehended. They should also complete the perfection of morality because no downfall is incurred and no compounded downfall is incurred, the perfection of patience because there is no disturbance, the perfection of perseverance because there is no physical or mental effort expended, the perfection of concentration because there is no experience, and the perfection of wisdom because all phenomena are not apprehended.



“Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings, having stood in the perfection of wisdom, should perfect the four applications of mindfulness because mindfulness cannot be apprehended, and they should perfect the four right efforts, four legs of miraculous power, five faculties, five powers, seven limbs of awakening, and eightfold noble path. They should cultivate the emptiness meditative stabilization, signlessness meditative stabilization, and wishlessness meditative stabilization. They should cultivate the four concentrations, four immeasurables, four formless absorptions, eight deliverances, nine serial absorptions, and nine perceptions. What are the nine? The nine perceptions are the perception of a bloated corpse, the perception of it chopped in half, the perception of it as putrid, the bloodied perception, the black-and-blue perception, the savaged perception, the torn-asunder perception, the bones perception, and the burnt-bones perception. They should cultivate mindfulness of the Buddha, mindfulness of the Dharma, mindfulness of the Saṅgha, mindfulness of morality, mindfulness of giving away, and mindfulness of the gods. They should cultivate mindfulness of breathing in and out, mindfulness of disgust, mindfulness of death, and mindfulness of what is included in the body. They should perfect the perception of impermanence, the perception of suffering, the perception of selflessness, the perception of the unclean, the perception of death, the perception that there is no delight in the entire world, and the perception that there is nothing to trust in the entire world; knowledge of suffering, knowledge of origination, knowledge of cessation, knowledge of the path, knowledge of extinction, knowledge of nonproduction, knowledge of dharma, subsequent realization knowledge, conventional knowledge, knowledge of mastery, and knowledge in accord with sound; and meditative stabilization with applied and sustained thought, meditative stabilization without applied thought but with sustained thought, meditative stabilization without either applied or sustained thought, what one does not understand, the faculty of understanding, the faculty of having understood, the stations of mastery, the stations of complete immersion, the four ways of gathering a retinue, the four presentations, the ten levels and ten practices, the ten forbearances, the twenty surpassing aspirations, the knowledge of a knower of all, the knowledge of calm abiding and insight, the three knowledges, the four detailed and thorough knowledges, the four fearlessnesses, the five undiminished clairvoyances, the six perfections, the six principles of being liked, the seven riches, the eight ways great persons think, the nine places beings live, the ten tathāgata powers, the eighteen distinct attributes of a buddha, great love, and great compassion.



“Bodhisattva great beings who want to fully awaken to the knowledge, furnished with the best of all aspects, of a knower of all aspects, who want to perfect the knowledge of all path aspects, who want to perfect all-knowledge, and who want to perfect the knowledge of the aspects of the thought activity of all beings should make an effort at the perfection of wisdom. Bodhisattva great beings who want to destroy all residual impressions, connections, and afflictions should make an effort at the perfection of wisdom.

 “Śāriputra, thus should bodhisattva great beings train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to enter into the secure state of a bodhisattva, who want to pass beyond the level of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, who want to stand on the irreversible level, who want to know the activity and continual movement of the thoughts of all beings, who want to surpass the knowledge of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, who want to acquire the dhāraṇī gateways, and who want to surpass gift-giving to all śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas by producing a single thought with associated rejoicing should train in the perfection of wisdom. Bodhisattva great beings who want to surpass the morality of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas by producing a single thought with associated rejoicing should train in the perfection of wisdom. Bodhisattva great beings who want to surpass the meditative stabilization, wisdom, liberation, and knowledge and seeing of liberation of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas by producing a single thought with associated rejoicing should train in the perfection of wisdom. Bodhisattva great beings who want to surpass the concentrations, meditative stabilizations, and absorptions of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas by producing a single thought with associated rejoicing should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Bodhisattva great beings who, for the sake of all beings, want giving even a little gift to become immeasurable and incalculable by turning it over to all-knowledge with skillful means should train in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, bodhisattva great beings who, for the sake of all beings, want even the little morality they have guarded, the little patience they have developed, the little effort they have exerted, the little concentration they have become absorbed in, and the little wisdom they have developed to become immeasurable and incalculable by turning them over to all-knowledge with skillful means should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of giving should train in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of morality, the perfection of patience, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of concentration, and the perfection of wisdom should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to thoroughly establish a buddha’s body should train in the perfection of wisdom. If they want to acquire the thirty-two major marks and the eighty minor signs of a great person, they should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to be born in the buddha’s line should train in the perfection of wisdom. Bodhisattva great beings who want to step onto the heir apparent’s level, and want never to be without the buddhas and bodhisattvas, should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, were bodhisattva great beings to feel this longing‍—‘May I be richly endowed with the wholesome roots with which I will respect, revere, honor, and worship the tathāgatas, the worthy ones, the perfectly complete lord buddhas’‍—they should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to satisfy all the desires of all beings with requirements such as food, drink, flowers, perfume, garments, flower garlands, incense, powders, creams, bedding, seats, houses, money, grain, medicines for relief of sickness, ornaments, jewels, gems, beryl, conch shells, crystals, corals, parks, and kingdoms should train in the perfection of wisdom. Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to establish all beings in a world as vast as the dharma-constituent and as far reaching as the space element in the perfection of giving, and who want to establish them in the perfection of morality, the perfection of patience, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of concentration, and the perfection of wisdom, should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to make a single wholesome thought of awakening inexhaustible until reaching complete awakening at the site of awakening should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who think, ‘May the buddhas in the ten directions praise me,’ should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want, through a single production of the thought, to approach as many world systems in the eastern direction as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River should train in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, bodhisattva great beings who want, through a single production of the thought, to approach as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in each of the southern, western, northern, northeastern, southeastern, southwestern, and northwestern directions, and below and above, should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want by uttering a single sound to instruct as many world systems in the eastern direction as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River should train in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, bodhisattva great beings who want by uttering a single sound to instruct as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in each of the southern, western, northern, northeastern, southeastern, southwestern, and northwestern directions, and below and above, should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to ensure that the line of buddhas will be unbroken should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to stand in inner emptiness should train in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, bodhisattva great beings who want to stand in outer emptiness, inner and outer emptiness, the emptiness of emptiness, great emptiness, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of the compounded, the emptiness of the uncompounded, the emptiness of what transcends limits, the emptiness of no beginning and no end, the emptiness of nonrepudiation, the emptiness of a basic nature, the emptiness of all dharmas, the emptiness of its own mark, the emptiness of not apprehending, the emptiness of a nonexistent thing, the emptiness of an intrinsic nature, and the emptiness that is the nonexistence of an intrinsic nature should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to comprehend the suchness of all dharmas, the suchness of the dharma-constituent, and the suchness of the very limit of reality should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to know how many tiny particles of earth there are in the great billionfold world system; who want to know the tiny particles of water in the oceans, torrents, lakes, ponds, wells, and rivulets; who want to know the tiny particles of fire; and who want to know the tiny particles of wind in all the world systems in the great billionfold world system should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to blow out with one puff of breath the fire in the great billionfold world system when the eon is burning up should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to blunt with the tip of one finger the force of the whirling, shaking circle of wind as it is circulating in the great billionfold world system, rocking, scattering, and pervasively shaking every mountain and the entire earth starting with the axial mountain Sumeru, the great Sumeru, the encircling mountain ranges, and the great encircling mountain ranges should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings thinking, ‘I should toss immeasurable world systems by bundling up every mountain there is in the great billionfold world system‍—the axial mountain Sumeru, the great Sumeru, the encircling mountain ranges, the great encircling mountain ranges, and so on‍—with a single strand of hair,’ should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want their single cross-legged posture to expand into and fill up the space of the great billionfold world system in its entirety should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want with a single begging bowl to distribute food to each of the lord buddhas, together with their śrāvaka saṅghas, in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east should train in the perfection of wisdom; and similarly, bodhisattva great beings who want to respect, want to revere, want to honor, and want to worship those tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas with clouds of flowers, incense, perfumes, garlands of flowers, creams, aromatic powders, clothes, parasols, flags, and banners should train in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, bodhisattva great beings who want with a single alms bowl to distribute food to each of the lord buddhas, together with their śrāvaka saṅghas, in each of as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions to the northeast, southeast, southwest, and northwest, and below and above, and similarly want to respect, want to revere, want to honor, and want to worship with clouds of flowers, incense, perfumes, garlands of flowers, creams, aromatic powders, clothes, parasols, flags, and streamers those tathāgatas, worthy ones, perfectly complete buddhas should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to establish beings in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east in the aggregate of morality; who want to establish them in the aggregate of meditative stabilization, in the aggregate of wisdom, in the aggregate of liberation, and in the aggregate of knowledge and seeing of liberation; and similarly want to establish them in the result of stream enterer, once-returner, and non-returner, in the state of a worthy one, in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, up to in the element of nirvāṇa without any aggregates left behind should train in the perfection of wisdom. As with the east, also connect this with as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions to the northeast, southeast, southwest, and northwest, and below and above.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should know, when giving a gift, that having given such a gift there is a great result: having given such a gift, they will be born in great sāla tree–like royal families, and similarly in great sāla tree–like brahmin families, and in great sāla tree–like business families; having given such a gift they will be born among the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, and similarly, born among the gods of Trāyastriṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita, and Nirmāṇarati; having given such a gift, they will reach the first concentration, and similarly reach the second concentration and the third concentration; having given such a gift they will reach the fourth concentration; having given such a gift they will reach the station of the nonperception absorption; having given such a gift they will reach the station of the endless-space absorption, and similarly, having given such a gift, they will reach the station of endless consciousness and the station of the nothing-at-all absorption; having given such a gift they will reach the station of the neither perception nor nonperception absorption; and having given such a gift they will acquire the thirty-seven dharmas on the side of awakening, and similarly they will reach the result of stream enterer, and reach the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, and the state of a worthy one.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should know that a gift thus given with skillful means completes the perfection of giving, and similarly completes the perfection of morality, the perfection of patience, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of concentration, and the perfection of wisdom.”



The Lord having spoken thus, venerable Śāriputra then inquired of him, “How, Lord, does the perfection of giving become complete when bodhisattva great beings are giving a gift? How do the perfection of morality, the perfection of patience, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of concentration, and the perfection of wisdom become complete when bodhisattva great beings are giving a gift?”



Venerable Śāriputra having thus inquired, the Lord said to him, “Śāriputra, the perfection of giving is completed by way of the purity of the three spheres, not apprehending a gift, giver, or recipient; the perfection of morality is completed because no downfall is incurred and no compounded downfall is incurred; the perfection of patience is completed because of not being disturbed; the perfection of perseverance is completed because of not expending physical or mental effort; the perfection of concentration is completed because of not being distracted and not constructing any ideas; and the perfection of wisdom is completed by way of not apprehending the knowledge of all dharmas. Thus, Śāriputra, when bodhisattvas give a gift like that, the six perfections are completed. Similarly all six perfections are completed in the perfection of morality, and similarly all six perfections are completed in the perfection of patience, the perfection of perseverance, the perfection of concentration, and the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to acquire all the buddha qualities of the past, future, and present lord buddhas should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to transcend all compounded and uncompounded phenomena should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to comprehend the suchness of all past, future, and present dharmas, and similarly, who want to reach the dharma-constituent, the limit of the absence of production, should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to be foremost among śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to be attendants of the lord buddhas should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to be in the inner circle of the lord buddhas should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to be in the inner retinue of the lord buddhas should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to have a large retinue should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to purify a donation should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to stop miserly thoughts should train in the perfection of wisdom, and similarly, those who want to prevent immoral thoughts from arising, who want to prevent malicious thoughts from arising, who want to quit having lazy thoughts, who want to quit having distracted thoughts, and who want to quit having confused thoughts should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to establish all beings in the bases of meritorious action arisen from giving, and who want to establish all beings in the bases of meritorious action arisen from morality, arisen from meditation, that accompany service, and arisen from material things should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to produce the five eyes should train in the perfection of wisdom. And what are the five eyes? They are the flesh eye, divine eye, wisdom eye, dharma eye, and buddha eye. If they want to produce them, they should train in the perfection of wisdom. Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to see with their divine eye as many buddhas and lords as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River to the east should train in the perfection of wisdom, and similarly, if they want to see with their divine eye as many buddhas and lords as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the south, west, and north, in the intermediate directions to the northeast, southeast, southwest and northwest, and below and above they should train in the perfection of wisdom. If they want to hear with their divine ear the doctrine those buddhas and lords explain they should train in the perfection of wisdom, and if they want to comprehend with their mind the thought of those buddhas and lords exactly as it is they should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to hear the entire doctrine that the lord buddhas in all world systems in all ten directions explain, and having heard it take it up perfectly by applying the power of memory uninterruptedly, and who do not want any to be lost up until they awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to see the buddhafields of past buddhas and lords, and of future buddhas and lords as well, and who want to see the buddhafields of present buddhas and lords now dwelling and maintaining themselves in world systems in all ten directions should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to master all that the tathāgatas have taught in discourses, melodious narrations, predictions, verses, summaries, introductions, accounts, birth stories, expanded texts, marvels, tales, and expositions, and what has not been heard by śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas, should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to take up all that the lord buddhas in the eastern direction have said, are saying, and will say, who want to bear it in mind, who want to read it aloud, and similarly who want to practice it and want to elaborate upon it in detail for others, should train in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, if they want to take up all that the lord buddhas in the southern, western, northern, northeastern, southeastern, southwestern, and northwestern directions, below and above, have said, are saying, and will say, want to bear it in mind, want to read it aloud, and similarly want to practice it and want to elaborate upon it in detail for others, they should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to shine down on the blinding darkness where the sun and moon do not shine, in as many world systems in the eastern direction as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, should train in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, if they want to shine light down on the blinding darkness where the sun and moon do not shine, in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the southern, western, northern, northeastern, southeastern, southwestern, and northwestern directions, below and above, they should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to proclaim to all the beings born in various buddhafields in as many world systems in the eastern direction as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River the word Buddha, the word Dharma, and the word Saṅgha, and who want to establish them in right view, should train in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, bodhisattva great beings who want to proclaim the words Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha and establish in right view beings in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the southern, western, northern, northeastern, southeastern, southwestern, and northwestern directions, below and above, where there is no sound of the words Buddha, Dharma, Saṅgha, or right view, should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want beings who are blind, in as many world systems in the eastern direction as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River, to see shapes with their eyes through their might should train in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, thinking, ‘May those who are deaf hear sounds with their ears, those who have gone mad regain their senses, the naked be clothed, hungry beings have their fill, the thirsty quench their thirst, beings who are stuck in terrible forms of life be freed from all the terrible forms of life and gain birth as humans, and may I establish the immoral in the aggregate of morality’; and similarly, thinking, ‘May I establish those who are not stabilized in meditation in the aggregate of meditative stabilization, in the aggregate of wisdom, in the aggregate of liberation, and in the aggregate of knowledge and seeing of liberation’; and thinking, ‘May I establish those who do not see the truths in the result of stream enterer’; and thinking, ‘May I establish them in the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening,’ they should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Similarly, bodhisattva great beings who want beings who are blind, in as many world systems as there are sand particles in the Gaṅgā River in the southern, western, northern, northeastern, southeastern, southwestern, and northwestern directions, below and above, to see shapes with their eyes through their might should train in the perfection of wisdom. Similarly, thinking, ‘May those who are deaf hear sounds with their ears, those who have gone mad regain their senses, the naked be clothed, hungry beings have their fill, the thirsty quench their thirst, beings who are stuck in terrible forms of life be freed from all the terrible forms of life and gain birth as humans, and may I establish the immoral in the aggregate of morality’; and similarly, thinking, ‘May I establish those who are not stabilized in meditation in the aggregate of meditative stabilization, in the aggregate of wisdom, in the aggregate of liberation, and in the aggregate of knowledge and seeing of liberation’; and thinking, ‘May I establish those who do not see the truths in the result of stream enterer’; and thinking, ‘May I establish them in the result of once-returner, the result of non-returner, the state of a worthy one, in a pratyekabuddha’s awakening, and in unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening,’ they should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings who want to train in the tathāgatas’ way of carrying themselves should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should contemplate like this: ‘When, oh when, will I look down as an elephant looks? How will it come to be that I will walk on the earth without my feet touching it by the measure of four fingers?’ Thinking thus, they should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should contemplate like this as well: ‘How will it come to be that I, surrounded by and at the head of many hundred thousand one hundred million billion Cāturmahā­rājika gods, and Trāyastriṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇarati, Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin, Brahmapurohita, Brahmakāyika, Brahmapārṣadya, Parīttābha, Apramāṇābha, Ābhāsvara, Parīttaśubha, Apramāṇaśubha, Śubhakṛtsna, Bṛhatphala, Śuddhāvāsa, Sudṛśa, Sudarśana, Avṛha, Atapa, and Akaniṣṭha gods, go forth to the site of awakening?’ Thinking thus, they should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should contemplate like this as well: ‘How will it come to be that the Cāturmahā­rājika gods, up to the Akaniṣṭha class, spread out my seat at the root of the tree at the site of awakening?’ Thinking thus, they should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should contemplate like this as well: ‘How will it come to be that this region of the earth on which I will fully awaken to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and walk, stand, sit, or lie down, become all diamond?’ Thinking thus, they should train in the perfection of wisdom.



“Moreover, Śāriputra, bodhisattva great beings practicing the perfection of wisdom should contemplate like this as well: ‘How will it come to be that on that very day that I go forth I will fully awaken, on that very day, to unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening, and, having fully awakened on that very day, that I will turn the wheel of the Dharma so that, having turned it, dust-free and stainless, the Dharma eye of countless beings beyond measure will become clear about the dharmas, countless beings beyond measure will stop appropriating anything and their minds will become freed from outflows, and countless beings beyond measure will not turn back from unsurpassed, perfect, complete awakening?’ Thinking thus, they should train in the perfection of wisdom.